
.. _Preface:

=======
Preface
=======

.. epigraph::

   It's a long way to the top if you wanna rock 'n' roll.

   -- AC/DC, *It's a Long Way to the Top*


.. index:: Preface

.. index:: open source

.. index:: F/LOSS

.. index:: Apache HTTP Server
.. index:: modules

The Apache HTTP Server is a remarkable piece of software. I've been
working with it, writing about it, and answering questions about it for
more than twenty-five years now, and it still surprises me. The core
distribution from the Apache Software Foundation is powerful enough for
most purposes, but what makes it truly remarkable is its extensibility.
If it doesn't do what you want out of the box, there's almost certainly
a module that will get you there. Dozens of modules ship with the server
itself, and if none of those fits, the odds are good that someone else
in the community has already solved your particular problem. (See
:ref:`Chapter_Contributing_to_apache` for more about how this open
source development model works, and how you can be part of it.)

This book is a collection of recipes — practical solutions to the
problems that people actually encounter when running Apache httpd. These
come from the questions I've fielded over the years on the
``users@httpd.apache.org`` mailing list, on Stack Overflow, on Reddit, at
conferences and meetups, and in the official documentation feedback
channels. Every recipe in this book started with someone asking "How do
I ...?" or, more often, "Why doesn't this work?"

I've collected more than two hundred of these problems and their
solutions, organized roughly by subject (see :ref:`How_This_Book_Is_Organized` below for
the full chapter rundown). The topics range from compiling httpd from source to configuring
TLS, from wrangling :module:`mod_rewrite` rules to tuning your MPM for
performance. Some are simple one-liners. Some require you to understand
several interacting modules. A few are problems for which I still don't
have a satisfying answer — those are included too, because I'd rather
tell you "I don't know yet" than pretend the problem doesn't exist.

Most of these recipes are aimed at administrators who have root access
to the server configuration. But many of them work just as well in
:file:`.htaccess` files, for those of you who are customizing behavior
in your own corner of a shared server. I've tried to note the
distinction where it matters.

This is a practical reference, not a novel. Reading it cover to cover
isn't going to reveal a plot — although if it did, I like to think it
would be something like "Roy Fielding, in the Library, with an
RFC!" [#apacheckbk-PREFACE-2-FNOTE-1]_ It's designed to be the book you
reach for when you have a specific problem to solve, using the table of
contents or the index to find your answer. That said, I hope you'll find
it pleasant enough to browse when you're not in crisis mode. Some of my
favorite discoveries in the httpd have come from flipping
through documentation looking for one thing and stumbling across
something else entirely. Roy Fielding, incidentally, would probably have
something to say about how that's content negotiation at the human
level, but I'll spare you the architectural digression.

If you find a mistake, know a better way to solve something, or have a
recipe you think belongs in here, I'd love to hear from you. File an
issue or pull request at https://github.com/rbowen/httpd-practical-guide — this
book is a living project, and contributions make it better for everyone.


.. _Other_Books:


Other Books
-----------

.. index:: Other books


I'll be honest with you: the bookshelf for Apache httpd is pretty bare
these days.

The Apache HTTP Server is a mature project, but it has not been static.
Major features — the event MPM, the expression parser, ``mod_md`` for
ACME certificates, HTTP/2 support, ``mod_proxy_wstunnel`` for
WebSockets — have landed in the 2.4 branch over the past decade, and
the configuration language has evolved considerably over the past decade.
Unfortunately, book publishers largely stopped commissioning httpd
titles around 2010, and the books that do exist cover a server that
looked quite different from the one you're running today.

The classics are worth knowing about, even if they're showing their age:

* **Apache: The Definitive Guide**, Third Edition, by Ben and Peter
  Laurie (O'Reilly, 2002). A thorough reference for its era, but it
  covers httpd 2.0 — a server that predates virtual host improvements,
  the expression parser, and modern authentication providers. If you
  find a copy, the architectural explanations are still valuable; the
  configuration examples are not.

* **Apache Administrator's Handbook**, by Rich Bowen, Daniel Lopez, and
  Allan Liska (Macmillan, 2002). Full disclosure: that's me on the
  cover. Also covers 2.0, also ancient. I've learned a few things
  since then.

More recent titles you may encounter on Amazon tend to be low-effort
self-published volumes — some clearly generated by AI — that recycle
the official documentation without adding much insight. I won't name
names, but if a book about Apache httpd was published after 2015 and
you've never heard of the author, approach with caution.

I humbly offer this book as the only current, in-depth reference for
Apache httpd 2.4 written by someone who has been part of the project
for over twenty-five years. If I've gotten something wrong, the source
is on GitHub (https://github.com/rbowen/httpd-practical-guide) and I welcome
corrections.

If your particular interest is URL rewriting, I'm also working on
*mod_rewrite And Friends*
(https://github.com/rbowen/mod_rewrite_book) — a dedicated deep dive
into :module:`mod_rewrite`, regular expressions, and the many other URL
mapping modules that often do the job better. That book is a companion
to this one, and the two are designed to complement each other.


.. _Other_Sources:

Other Sources
-------------

.. index:: Other sources
.. index:: mailing lists
.. index:: Stack Overflow
.. index:: Reddit


The official Apache httpd documentation at https://httpd.apache.org/docs/
is the single most important resource available to you, and it's free.
I've spent a significant chunk of my career working on those docs, and
I'm biased, but they really are good. When in doubt, start there.

Beyond the docs, here's where to find help in 2026:

* **The users@httpd.apache.org mailing list** is still the best place
  to get help from people who actually know the server, including some
  of the developers. Yes, it's a mailing list, and yes, I know that
  feels like 1998. But the signal-to-noise ratio is excellent, the
  archives are searchable, and the people there genuinely want to help.
  You can subscribe the traditional way, or browse and post through the
  web interface at https://lists.apache.org/list.html?users@httpd.apache.org —
  which feels slightly more like this century. To subscribe, visit
  https://httpd.apache.org/userslist.html.

* **The dev@httpd.apache.org mailing list** is for discussion of the
  server's development — bugs, features, patches, and the occasional
  spirited debate about API design. If you're interested in contributing
  code, or you want to understand *why* something works the way it does,
  this is where to go. You'll need to be comfortable reading C.
  Web interface: https://lists.apache.org/list.html?dev@httpd.apache.org

* **Stack Overflow** and **ServerFault** both have substantial archives
  of Apache httpd questions. New questions still get asked, though
  the volume has declined as Stack Overflow's community has contracted.
  The archive is the real value — search before you post, because your
  question has almost certainly been asked before.

* **Reddit** — there's no dedicated httpd subreddit (yet), but
  r/sysadmin, r/selfhosted, and r/apache are all places where httpd
  questions come up. The quality of answers varies, but you'll sometimes
  get fast help from people running the same setup you are.

* **The #httpd IRC channel on irc.libera.chat** is still there, and I
  still hang out in it. I won't pretend it's bustling — IRC in 2026 is
  a niche pursuit — but if you're an IRC person, you're welcome.

* **AI assistants** — let's be honest, a lot of people are going to ask
  ChatGPT or similar before they ask a mailing list. That's fine. Just
  be aware that AI models are confidently wrong about Apache httpd
  configuration with alarming regularity, especially around directive
  context, version-specific behavior, and the finer points of
  :module:`mod_rewrite`. If an AI gives you a config snippet, test it.
  Then test it again. The error log is your friend.

One thing worth saying explicitly: all of these community resources are
staffed by volunteers. Nobody is obligated to answer your question, and
nobody is getting paid to do it. Be patient, be polite, show your work
(include your config, your error log, and what you've already tried),
and you'll be amazed at how generous people are with their time.


.. _How_This_Book_Is_Organized:

How This Book Is Organized
--------------------------

.. index:: How this book is organized


The book is organized into six parts, grouping related topics by how
you'll encounter them as an httpd administrator. You don't need to
read them in order — jump to whatever problem you're trying to solve.

**Part I — Getting Started** covers installation, your first website,
and ``.htaccess`` files — the three things you need earliest.

* :ref:`Chapter_Installation` — installing from packages or source, on
  Linux, Windows, or macOS; starting and stopping the server; systemd
  integration.
* :ref:`Chapter_My_First_Website` — putting up your first site, editing
  configuration files, DNS basics, and the Options directive.
* :ref:`Chapter_htaccess` — per-directory configuration files. Many
  readers only have ``.htaccess`` access, so this comes early.

**Part II — Core Configuration** is the heart of everyday
administration.

* :ref:`Chapter_Common_modules` — finding, installing, and
  troubleshooting third-party modules.
* :ref:`Chapter_Virtual_hosts` — running multiple sites on one server,
  name-based and IP-based virtual hosts, mass virtual hosting.
* :ref:`Chapter_URL_Mapping` — how httpd turns a URL into content:
  Alias, Redirect, mod_dir, content negotiation.
* :ref:`Chapter_Directory_listing` — customizing mod_autoindex directory
  listings.
* :ref:`Chapter_Logging` — access logs, error logs, custom log formats,
  log rotation, and conditional logging.

**Part III — Security and Access Control** covers authentication,
authorization, and encryption — who gets in and how.

* :ref:`Chapter_AAA` — Basic and Digest authentication, LDAP, database
  backends, form-based login, the 2.4 authorization model.
* :ref:`Chapter_Security` — file permissions, mod_security, request
  timeouts, and general hardening.
* :ref:`Chapter_SSL_and_TLS` — certificates, Let's Encrypt, TLS
  configuration, and common SSL pitfalls.

**Part IV — Applications** is about serving dynamic content and
proxying to application backends.

* :ref:`Chapter_Dynamic_content` — CGI, Server Side Includes, PHP-FPM
  via FastCGI proxy, and environment variables.
* :ref:`Chapter_Proxies` — forward and reverse proxying, load balancing,
  WebSocket tunneling, and proxy authentication.
* :ref:`Chapter_Filters_And_Handlers` — content filters, output
  compression, mod_deflate, mod_brotli, and the filter chain.

**Part V — Power User** collects the tools for advanced URL
manipulation and configuration scripting.

* :ref:`Chapter_regex` — a standalone introduction to regular
  expressions, aimed at the patterns you'll actually use in httpd.
* :ref:`Chapter_mod_rewrite` — essential mod_rewrite recipes. For
  comprehensive coverage, see my companion book *mod_rewrite And
  Friends*.
* :ref:`Chapter_per_request` — Define, IfDefine, mod_macro, and
  mod_vhost_alias.

**Part VI — Operations** focuses on running the server well, monitoring
it, and contributing back to the project.

* :ref:`Chapter_Performance_and_testing` — MPM tuning, caching,
  compression, benchmarking, and HTTP caching headers.
* :ref:`Chapter_info_and_status` — mod_info and mod_status for
  monitoring your running server.
* :ref:`Chapter_userdir` — serving content from user home directories.
* :ref:`Chapter_Contributing_to_apache` — how to contribute code, docs,
  and bug reports to the Apache HTTP Server project.


.. _Conventions_Used_in_This_Book:

Conventions Used in This Book
-----------------------------

.. index:: Conventions used in this book


Throughout this book certain stylistic conventions are followed.
Once you are accustomed to them, you can easily distinguish between
comments, commands you need to type, values you need to supply, and so
forth.

In some cases, the typeface of terms in the main text will be
different and likewise in code examples. The details of what the
different styles (italic, boldface, etc.) mean are described in the
following sections.


.. _Programming_Conventions:

Programming Conventions
-----------------------


In this book, most case examples of code will be in the form of
excerpts from scripts, rather than actual application code. When
commands need to be issued at a command-line prompt (such as an xterm
for a Unixish system or a DOS command prompt for Windows), they will
look something like this:


.. code-block:: text

   % find /usr/local -name apachectl -print
   # /usr/local/apache/bin/apachectl graceful
   C:> cd "\Program Files\Apache Group\Apache\bin"
   C:\Program Files\Apache Group\Apache\bin> apache -k stop


On Unixish systems, command prompts that begin with ``#`` indicate that 
you need to be logged in as the superuser (root username); if the 
prompt begins with ``%``, then the command can be used by any user. In
this book, I tend to prefer the use of ``sudo`` to execute commands
that need root privileges, which is considered best security practice.


.. _Typesetting_Conventions:

Typesetting Conventions
-----------------------


The following typographic conventions are used in this book:

**Italic**:: 
              Used for commands, filenames, abbreviations, citations of
              books and articles, email addresses, URLs, and Usenet group
              names.

Bold:: 
              Used for labeling menu choices in a graphical
              interface.

``Constant Width``:: 
              Used for function names, command options, computer output,
              environment variable names, literal strings, and code
              examples.


**``Constant Width Bold``**:: 
              Used for user input in computer dialogues and
              examples.


**``Constant Width Italic``**:: 
              Used for replaceable parameters, filesystem paths, and
              variable names.


.. _apacheckbk-PREFACE-2-NOTE-65:


.. tip::

   This icon signifies a tip, suggestion, or cool trick.


.. note::

   This icon signifies an additional note, or related information.


.. _apacheckbk-PREFACE-2-NOTE-66:


.. warning::

   This icon indicates a warning, caution, such as pointing out something
   that could go wrong.


.. _Documentation_Conventions_id103636:

Documentation Conventions
-------------------------


Because the topics covered in this book have been written about
extensively both online and in print, there are different sources of
information to which it will refer you. The most common ones are as
follows:


.. _The_online_manual_man_pages_on_a_Unixish_system_id103655:

The online manual ("man") pages on a Unixish system
---------------------------------------------------


References to the manpages will appear something like, "For
more information, see the **kill(1)** manpage." The
number in parentheses is the manual section; you can access this
page with a command such as:


.. code-block:: text

   % man 1 kill


.. _The_Apache_web_server_documentation_id103686:

httpd documentation
-------------------


Such a reference may appear as "See the ``mod_auth`` 
documentation for details." This refers to a Web page like:


https://httpd.apache.org/docs/mod/mod_auth.html

In some cases, the reference will be to a specific httpd
directive rather than an actual module; in cases like this, you can
locate the appropriate Web page by looking up the directive name
on:


https://httpd.apache.org/docs/mod/quickreference.html

This page lists all of the directives available in the
standard httpd package. In some situations, the directive may be
specific to a nonstandard or third-party module, in which case the
documentation should be located wherever the module itself was
found. The links above are for the documentation for the current
release of the software — Version 2.4.


.. _Using_Code_Examples:

Using Code Examples
-------------------

.. index:: Using code examples


This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you
may use the code in this book in your programs and documentation. You do
not need to contact us for permission unless you're reproducing a
significant portion of the code.

All code examples in this book are licensed under the Apache License,
Version 2.0. See the LICENSE file for details.

I appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution
usually includes the title and author. For example:
"**Apache httpd: A Practical Guide**, Fourth Edition, by Rich Bowen.
Copyright 2004–2026 Rich Bowen. Earlier editions co-authored with Ken Coar."

Apache, Apache HTTP Server, Apache httpd, and the Apache oak leaf logo are trademarks of
`The Apache Software Foundation <https://www.apache.org/>`_.
This book is not affiliated with or endorsed by the Apache Software
Foundation.


.. _Wed_Like_to_Hear_from_You:

I'd Like to Hear from You
--------------------------

.. index:: I'd like to hear from you

.. index:: Contacting us


I have tested and verified the information in this book to the
best of my ability, but you may find that features have changed (which
may in fact resemble bugs). Please let us know about any errors you
find, as well as your suggestions for future editions, by filing an
issue or pull request on the book's GitHub repository:

https://github.com/rbowen/httpd-practical-guide

You can also reach Rich Bowen directly at rbowen@rcbowen.com.


.. _Acknowledgments:

Acknowledgments
---------------

.. index:: Acknowledgements


Originally, each recipe was going to be individually attributed,
but that turned out to be logistically impossible.

Many people have helped us during the writing of this book, by
posing a problem, providing a solution, proofreading, reviewing,
editing, or just (!) providing moral support. This multitude, to each of
whom I am profoundly grateful, includes ...



This book is dedicated:

To my muses, Rhi, Z, and E.

Also, to the members of the Apache httpd PMC, and the members of the
Apache Software Foundation, for their years of enriching my life, not
to mention my career.

To the kind strangers who took me under their wings when I stumbled
across Apache httpd back in the late 1900s - Ken Coar, Jim Jagielski,
and Sally Khudairi - and who have become my friends as well as my
mentors.

To the denizens of the ``#httpd`` IRC channel on Libera Chat. You provided
most of the questions here, as well as hours and days and years of
fine-tuning the answers. This book would literally not exist without
you.

To the wonderful people we worked with at O'Reilly on earlier editions,
especially Ally MacDonald, who put up with our painfully slow progress
for more than 3 years.

To Terry Pratchett, Arthur C. Clarke, and Ray Bradbury, who told me the 
stories that got me writing in the first place. I miss you.

To Maria, who makes everything beautiful. 
And so that was all right, Best Beloved. Do you see?


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#apacheckbk-PREFACE-2-FNOTE-1] An obscure reference to a board game called Clue and a somewhat less obscure developer of HTTP.
